---
layout: post
title: Memory Cells
date: 2016-11-11 23:00
comments: true
tags:
---

We've spent four chapters now building machinery in order to construct memory
blocks -- large arrays of our `Snap*` machine -- capable of being selectively
written-to and addressed-from. This "selectively" criterion generally goes by
the name **addressable**, which means that each `Snap*` machine has an
"address", which we know beforehand and can use to route signals to and from it.

As usual, this notion of *addressability* has deeper and more interesting
implications in the wider theoretical sense, but we are not interested in that
today. Abstractions are only valuable in the fact that they allow us to
*abstract over* something, and we do not yet have an example over which we can
abstract.

But we do, in fact, have something else which we'd like to abstract over, and
that is this memory block we've so desired over these four long chapters. A good
way to go about designing these things is to completely ignore the internals,
and reason about how you'd like it to work if someone else had built it and
didn't provide any kind of documentation. One lens for abstraction is in terms
of "usability" -- can we provide a simple mental model for describing how this
thing works, and then manage to *never* violate that model? If so, we have
provided a useful abstraction. If not, the thing we have built deserves to be
thrown into the trash and done again.

And so the question is asked: how would we like this machine to operate? Another
phrasing of that question is "what are its semantics?" which is equivalently
"what is our mental model of this thing?"

Let's start with what we know so far. We'd like to be able to write to a
`Snap*`, which suggests we'll need to get input to the `Snap*`, which means at
the very least we'll need signals `S:1` and `V:n`, albeit possibly manipulated
somehow to make the interface "cleaner". But we also need to fit several of
these `Snap*`s into one logical machine, and we'll need a way to *address* them.
Fortunately we were forward thinking and have already built `Demux`, which, if
you think about it, provides *exactly* the mechanism necessary for addressing
machines.

So what does `Demux` take as input? A payload, `A:n` (although this `:n` need
*not* be the same as the multiwire `V:n` on `Snap*` -- remember, polymorphic
wires with the same letter need only be consistent *within a single diagram*.
When we merge these things together, we'll rename one of those `:n`s to a
different letter so that we don't confuse ourselves later). `Demux` also takes
an input `D:d`, which is responsible for describing a "destination" output
multiwire to move the payload to.

Presumably this means we'd like a `Demux` machine in front of a bunch of `Snap*`
machines, and that the payload to `Demux` should be the value `V` we're sending
to our `Snap*`s. As such, we'll need to line up the output multiwires from
`Demux` with the value multiwire to `Snap*`, and we realize that yes, indeed the
`:n` annotation on the `A` is in fact the same as the `:n` annotation on the
`V`. Remember -- a wire has the same value all along it, and multiwires are no
different. In order to connect an output multiwire to an input multiwire, they
*must* have the same annotation, or they wouldn't physically (or logically)
"fit" together.

Recall that the other thing we want from our memory block is to be able to
selectively *read* from an addressable `Snap*` machine. If you remember,
`Snap*`'s output is always the last thing it snapshotted, and so if we have
several of these things together, we'll have nothing but a cacophony of values,
only *one* of which we actually want. But only sometimes.

Why only sometimes? It seems more parsimonious that if we're not always
*writing* to a `Snap*` (because it requires you to raise the `S`napshot wire),
then we probably don't want to always be *reading* from it either. This way,
consumers of the data can tightly control exactly what they're getting -- they
can raise a wire, receive the data they wanted, and then go on their jolly way.
Making the data *read on demand* means that it's tricky for someone else
listening on the same output line to receive information meant for someone else.

It's like the difference between a telephone and a walkie-talkie; a telephone
notifies someone that you'd like some data, and the connection only stays open
as long as you require. A walkie-talkie on the other hand is always listening,
and having multiple people share the same channel results in "chatter" -- you'll
be distracted any time *anyone* is talking, even if it's not towards you.

With this semantic constraint, it's now obvious that we need a way to tell our
memory block machine that we're listening, and it should send data to us.
Because we're *listening* for data, don't want to put any data on the payload
line, and so any writes that happen simultaneously with our read will
accidentally *write over* the data we're trying to read. As a result, we
probably don't want to be able to *read* and *write* at the same time; the only
tool we know for dealing with that is to make it the same line, where a 0 value
represents one of the possibilities, and 1 represents the other. Unfortunately,
such a decision means that we need *another* wire to tell the machine to
actually do something. A "go for it!" kind of signal, if you will.

On a cursory glance, we seem to have described exactly what we want out of our
memory block, so let's start synthesizing all of the things we decided. Our
machine needs to take some inputs:

* a payload `A:n`
* a destination `D:d`
* a read-write option `RW:1`, where 0 describes a "read" and a 1 describes a
  "write"
* and an active "go" wire `G:1`

whose semantics are as follows:

| RW | G | Output | Side Effect |
|:--:|:-:|:------:|:-----------:|
| _  | 0 | Nothing | Nothing |
| 0  | 1 | `Snap*` at **D** | Nothing |
| 1  | 1 | Nothing | Set `Snap*` at **D** to **A** |

What tools to we have available to us to construct such a beast? Well we know
that anything `and`ed against a 0 is also 0, so `and`ing against the `G` wire
allows us to turn the entire machine on or off. In particular, the things we'd
want to `and` against would be the `S`napshot wire in the `Snap*`, and the
*output* of the `Snap*` (so that we don't read any data if `G` is low).

`Demux` gives us the capability to address a particular machine based on some
input `D:d`, which allows us to move not only the payload `A` to the correct
`Snap*`, but also the snapshot value `S`. The last trick is to "un-demux" the
results from our many `Snap*`s onto a single output multiwire. This, of course,
we have already looked at in the form of `Mux2`. We won't be covering the
construction of the generalization of `Mux2` to a polymorphic `Mux`, but it
follows exactly the same procedure we did to construct `Demux` from `Demux2`.

With all of the pieces and reasoning in place, let's go about building this
sucker.

```{#mem}
connecting ((d, _, output):ds@((d', input, _):_)) =
  assertSame d output d' input >> connecting ds
connecting _ = return ()

multiIn' n s = mkCon s (In 0) ||| sspacer # scale 0.5 ||| inputMulti ||| wireLabel n ||| mkCon s (Out 0)
machine_ x y z s = machine x y z s # scaleX 0.75
machine_' w x y z s = machine' w x y z s # scaleX 0.75

same d p (x, y) = do
  d' <- liftDia d
  assertSame d' p x y
  return d'

circuit = labeled "Mem" $ runCircuit $ void $ do
  demuxV <- liftDia $ machine_ ["A", "D"] [""] "Demux"
  demuxS <- liftDia $ machine_ ["A", "D"] [""] "Demux"
  vb <- liftDia wire
  vIn <- liftDia vwire
  sb <- liftDia wire
  sIn <- liftDia vwire
  snap <- liftDia $ machine_' [outputMulti, outputMulti] ["V", "S"] ["Q"] "Snap*"
  connecting [ (demuxV, undefined, Out 0)
             , (vb, In 0, Out 0)
             , (vIn, In 0, Out 0)
             , (snap, In 0, undefined)
             ]
  connecting [ (demuxS, undefined, Out 0)
             , (sb, In 0, Out 0)
             , (sIn, Out 0, In 0)
             , (snap, In 1, undefined)
             ]
  d <- liftDia $ multiIn "D:d"
  dbd <- aligning con Split (demuxV, In 0) (d, Out 0)
  dbv <- aligning con Split (dbd, Split) (demuxV, In 1)
  dbs <- aligning con Split (dbd, Split) (demuxS, In 1)
  arr (d, Out 0) (dbd, Split)
  arr (dbd, Split) (dbv, Split)
  spaceV 0.5 demuxS d

  rwSAnd <- liftDia $ scale 0.5 <$> andGate
  rwSW <- liftDia $ scale 0.5 <$> wire
  connecting [ (rwSAnd, undefined, Out 0)
             , (rwSW, In 0, Out 0)
             , (demuxS, In 0, undefined)
             ]
  rsSAndGb <- same con Split (rwSAnd, In 1)
  rsSAndIn <- liftDia $ scale 0.5 <$> wire
  assertSame rsSAndIn (Out 0) rwSAnd (In 0)
  rsSAndRWb <- same con Split (rsSAndIn, In 0)

  rwGo <- liftDia $ scale 0.85 <$> andGate
  spaceV 1.2 rwGo snap
  rwNot <- liftDia $ scale 0.35 <$> notGate
  assertSame rwNot (Out 0) rwGo (In 0)
  getPort rwGo (Out 0) >>= \p1 ->
    getPort snap (Out 0) >>= \p2 -> above p1 p2

  rw <- aligning ((\x -> wireLabel "RW" ||| x # scale 2) <$> wire) (Out 0) (rsSAndRWb, Split) (rwNot, In 0)
  same con Split (rw, Out 0)
  arr (rw, Out 0) (rsSAndRWb, Split)
  arr (rw, Out 0) (rwNot, In 0)

  g <- aligning ((\x -> wireLabel "G" ||| x # scale 2) <$> wire) (Out 0) (rw, Out 0) (rwGo, In 1)
  gb <- aligning con Split (rsSAndGb, Split) (g, Out 0)
  arr (g, Out 0) (rwGo, In 1)
  arr (gb, Split) (rsSAndGb, Split)

  a <- aligning (multiIn "A:n") (In 0) (d, In 0) (demuxV, In 0)
  arr (a, Out 0) (demuxV, In 0)

  sameX d g

  rwGoOut <- liftDia wire
  rwGoDown <- liftDia $ scale 2.25 <$> vwire
  connecting [ (rwGo, undefined, Out 0)
             , (rwGoOut, In 0, Out 0)
             , (rwGoDown, In 0, undefined)
             ]
  ands <- liftDia $ andGate' inputWire outputMulti
  arr (rwGoDown, Out 0) (ands, In 0)

  snapout <- liftDia $ multiIn ":(2^d,n)"
  mux <- liftDia $ (\x -> x ||| inputWire ||| wireLabel ":n") <$> machine_ ["*", "D"] [""] "Mux"
  andsout <- liftDia $ multiIn' ":(2^d,n)"
  connecting [ (snap, undefined, Out 0)
             , (snapout, In 0, Out 0)
             , (ands, In 1, Out 0)
             , (andsout, In 0, Out 0)
             , (mux, In 0, Out 0)
             ]
  dbend <- aligning bend Split (mux, In 1) (d, Out 0)
  arr (d, Out 0) (dbend, Split)
  arr (dbend, Split) (mux, In 1)
```

Egads, what a monster. But remember, *don't panic!* This `Mem` thing looks
tricky at first, but it's still exactly the thing we described earlier. As an
exercise, convince yourself that `Mem` has the same semantics as the function
table we drew earlier.

We've spent a long time (five chapters now!) building this `Mem` machine; it
feels like time for a break. In the next chapter, we'll upgrade our
understanding of what an annotation is, and find that they are much more
powerful than we'd ever imagined. We'll then start looking at how we can build a
new way of describing these machine diagrams, since they're getting surprisingly
large and difficult (for you to read, and for me to draw!).

---

## Exercises

1) Go through the exercise of generalizing `Mux2` to a polymorphic `Mux`.
2) Work out the semantic function table of `Mem`, and ensure that it agrees with
   the one given previously.

