---
layout: post
title: Tapes
date: 2016-11-24 14:00
comments: true
tags:
---

In the last chapter, we discussed the *P''* computer architecture -- a highly
simplified computer consisting of two tapes. *P''* has a *program tape*, which
contains the current program to run, and it also has a *memory tape*, where it
can store `Nat`s as a form of "scratch work."

As a required step towards building a *P''* machine, we'll obviously need to
build this tape **data structure**. A *data structure* is a container for
storing information, complete with an interface for interacting with it, and
trade-offs for when one *data structure* should be used in place of another.

## Tapes

We've already seen a *data structure*, the `List a`. `List a` fits our
description for what it means to be a *data structure*: it is a container of
elements of type `a`, and its interface allows us to pull off the front of the
list, getting back the element there, and the remainder of the list. We'll look
at trade-offs later when we discuss the Big-O notation, but that won't be for
some time yet.

Before we go ahead and build a tape, we should probably understand what a tape
is, and how we'll want to interact with it. Recall that a tape has a *read
head*, which corresponds to the "active" element on the tape; we're only ever
allowed to look at the *read head* of the tape. In addition, we have two spools
on either side of the read head, which act as a kind of "storage". As we move
the *read head* left and right, the value at the *read head* moves to one of the
spools, and a new value comes under the *read head* from the other spool. We
also said that tapes are *infinitely long* in both directions, a fact we'll need
to deal with at some point.

So, conceptually, we can represent a tape as some new type `Tape a`, consisting
of two "spools containing `a`s", and a distinguished "read head", itself of type
`a`. But what should these "spools" be? Well, let's go back to our use-cases and
see what we need from the spools. The spools only ever absorb or provide a new
element for the *read head* -- meaning we need to either be able to put an
element onto the spool, or take one off. Also, we'd like to get the elements out
of the spool in the *opposite order* that we put them in on. Think about this
like a VHS tape -- the further back you rewind from a moment, the more you need
to fast-forward to get back to where you were.

With all of this in our minds simultaneously, we see that the "spools" we wanted
are nothing more than just `List a`. We can always pull the head off of a `List
a` (provide an `a` to the *read head*), or "push" one in (absorbing the *read
head*). Since we can only ever get the first thing in the list, if we add things
to the front of the list, we'll get the desired property that elements come out
in the opposite order that they were added. This property is sometimes known as
"last in, first out".

We're now ready to provide a type definition for tapes:

```
type Tape a = Tape (List a) a (List a)
```

A `Tape a` is nothing more than two `List a`s representing the spools, and a
value of type `a` sitting in the middle, representing our *read head*. We'll
provide a few helper functions to deal with a `Tape a`:

```
readHead : Tape a -> a
readHead (Tape _ a _) = a
```

`readHead : Tape a -> a` is nothing but a function that gets the current value
"under focus" of the tape -- which is to say, the *read head*. We also need some
functions to move the *read head* left and right:

```
moveLeft : Tape a -> Tape a
moveLeft (Tape (Cons l ls) a rs) = Tape ls l (Cons a rs)
moveLeft (Tape Nil         a rs) = ???
```

`moveLeft : Tape a -> Tape a` takes the first thing off the left-most spool, and
moves it to the current *read head*. It pushes the current *read head* into the
right-most spool. But there's a problem! What happens if our left-most spool is
`Nil` (empty)? Conceptually, our spools are infinitely long, but we don't have a
notion of infinity to work with, unfortunately. The best we can do is to
"magically" pull `a`s out of nowhere, and pretend like they were in the spool to
begin with. But which value of type `a` should we choose?

Because `a` is polymorphic, there's no "obvious" answer for which `a` to use.
It's going to depend on the specific type that fills in the type variable `a`.
For the program tape, we probably want to fill in the rest of the tape with
*Halt* instructions. But for the memory tape, we want to fill it in with $0$s.

We can capture this "most interesting element" to fill the tapes with via a new
`class` of patterns, just like we had the `Kleisli` class pattern!

```
class Point a where
  point : a
```

This should be read as "`Point` is a class of patterns, parameterized by some
type `a`. This pattern is in effect whenever we have a value `point : a`." You
can think of a `Point a` as being some type `a` with a "point of interest". With
this `point : a` machinery in place, let's revisit `moveLeft`:

```
moveLeft : Point a => Tape a -> Tape a
moveLeft (Tape (Cons l ls) a rs) = Tape ls  l     (Cons a rs)
moveLeft (Tape Nil         a rs) = Tape Nil point (Cons a rs)
```

Now, if the left-most spool runs out of elements, we can use our witness of a
`Point a` pattern to "pull an `a` out of nowhere!" Recall that `point : a` is a
value that exists whenever we have a witness of the `Point a` pattern.

The machine for `moveRight` is symmetric to the `moveLeft` example:

```
moveRight : Point a => Tape a -> Tape a
moveRight (Tape ls a (Cons r rs)) = Tape (Cons a ls) r     rs
moveRight (Tape ls a Nil)         = Tape (Cons a ls) point Nil
```

It's worth thinking about this "pulling `a`s out of nowhere" trick and why it
works. Conceptually our spools have infinite length, but because the universe
doesn't have infinite size, we can't directly make an equivalent analogue.
However, what we can do is make a spool that is "as big as necessary".
Unfortunately, we don't know how big "necessary" is in advance, so our next best
bet is to make a spool that can become larger whenever more is requested. This
solves the same problem, and so we're good to go!


## The P'' Machine

Now, we know that a *P''* machine is defined as two tapes: one for instructions,
and one for memory. We know that the memory tape is `Tape Nat`, but what type
should we use for our instructions?

We made a list of seven possible instructions before. An particular instruction
could be any one of *Move Left*, *Move Right*, *Increment*, *Decrement*, *Enter
Loop*, *Exit Loop*, or *Halt*. The word "or" in this list should indicate that
we want a *sum* type to describe these options:

```
type Instr = MoveLeft
           | MoveRight
           | Increment
           | Decrement
           | EnterLoop
           | ExitLoop
           | Halt
```

and we can define the "points of interest" for our `Instr`uctions and `Nat`s:

```
instance Point Instr where
  point = Halt

instance Point Nat where
  point = 0
```

Given all of this, we can now define our *P''* machine as the product type of a
`Tape Instr` and a `Tape Nat`.

```
type P'' = P'' (Tape Instr) (Tape Nat)
```

You should be convinced that this `P''` type corresponds exactly to what we said
we meant by a *P''* machine. We still need to write functions to "execute" the
program described by our `Tape Instr`, but that shouldn't be too hard.

In the next chapter, we'll build this "executor" function, which looks like
`execute : P'' -> P''` -- transforming a *P''* machine into another by
evaluating the instruction at the *read head* of the program tape. When
`execute` is run repetitively, until a `Halt` instruction is run, we'll have our
first working computer and everything will be groovy.

---

## Exercises

1) Use *equational reasoning* to show that
   `readHead (moveRight (moveLeft x)) = readHead x` for every
   `x : Point a => List a`, and that
   `readHead (moveLeft (moveRight x)) = readHead x`.
2) Why can't we make the stronger claims of *equational reasoning* that
   `moveRight (moveLeft x) = x` and `moveLeft (moveRight x) = x`? Under which
   circumstances would this prove to not be true?
3) Prove that `Maybe a` has an `instance` of the `Point` pattern, by writing
   *the* instance for it.

