---
layout: post
title: "2013: Doing Something With My Life"
date: 2014-01-10 09:54
comments: true
tags: results, life, analytics
---

Kind of late to the party on this one -- writing it took many moons longer than
expected, and so the tenses probably don't make a lot of sense or have any sense
of coherency to them. I'm okay with that though, because I have a bet with a
coworker that if I don't get this post out by tomorrow I'll owe him \$50.
Onwards.

### I. Melodrama

Being home for the holidays is a strange experience, made especially so since
it's the first time I've been back in two years.

Terrace, BC feels like it is stuck in suspended animation -- things are almost
exactly how they were two years ago. There are a few new shops on the object
level, but the metalevel is almost terrifyingly stagnant.

The pace of life here is slow, almost unbearably so. I remember (and still hold
the notion) that life in Ontario is too fast for me, but it seems that I have
adjusted without realizing it.

Things happen here because that's the way they've always happened. It's a
startling example of the status quo. But perhaps the worst part is that nobody
here seems to challenge their beliefs, nor make any attempt to better
themselves.

If you know me even a little bit, you'll realize how frustrating I find such
things.

And yet I can find myself getting wrapped up in this place. The zeitgeist of
stagnancy has been clutching at me for my time here, and I can feel myself
giving in to it. Old, bad habits of mine have returned, in what I consider to be
a case of revertigo, and it's absolutely terrifying. I've always said that if
you don't get out of this city fast enough, you never will, and I think this
fact is a potent reminder.

To those of my friends who live here, but dream of bigger things, take my word
for it. Get out of here, as soon as you can, because you won't be able to if you
let it get ahold.

Anyway, all melodrama aside, it is officially the New Year. 2014 for anyone who
is counting (except for antiquity, but that doesn't really *count*, right?).

In an attempt to boost my spirits and fight back against Terrace's aura, I'm
writing a blog post on my last year (almost entirely devoid of Terrace!) and all
of the super cool things that happened in it. I entirely consider 2013 to have
been my best year yet, and I'm making every effort to ensure the trend doesn't
stop here.

So indulge me in my reflection. Let's look at what was accomplished, how my
views on life changed, some of the neat things I read, and finally, things that
/didn't/ work very well. Let's go!

### II. Object

First up, I want to take a look at object level things. These are projects and
accomplishments in the last year that are easily quantifiable and correspond to
things in real life (as opposed to meta level things in the next section).

In **January**, I attended [CFAR]'s Applied Rationality Workshop and it really
and truly changed my life, in every sense of the phrase. For the better, in case
you were wondering. The workshop taught me lots of cool things (like pinning
down my beliefs, beating procrastination, estimating relative value of projects,
etc), but, by and large, I find that I don't use these techniques anymore. What
I consider to be the most beneficial aspect of the workshop was meeting ~50
extremely fantastic people...

[CFAR]: http://rationality.org

...and finding myself coming up wonting in comparison to them. Here were living
and breathing examples of people who had sat down and consciously made something
of themselves. CFAR was entirely responsible for framing the rest of my year in
such a positive way, but I'll talk more about why when we get to the meta level
section.

Also at the workshop (but not as a part of it), I ran into [Josh Kaufman], who
sat me down and debugged my beliefs about money, name that it isn't evil in and
of itself. Looking at money as a substitute for utility is a helpful mindset,
and directly lead me to a raise and having no qualms about being paid for
valuable services which I am good at providing.

[Josh Kaufman]: http://joshkaufman.net/

In **February**, as an initial part of debugging my mind, I sat down and forced
myself to eat vegetables. This might sound weird to you normal people, but I had
never gotten out of my childhood hatred of vegetables and would avoid them at
any cost necessary. I'm still not great at eating them, but at least I don't run
out of the room screaming anymore (less of a hyperbole than you might expect).

Continuing on with my mental debugging, I convinced two of my fashionable
friends to take me out shopping and give me a makeover. The result was
startling, and my self-confidence soared well beyond anything I could remember
experiencing.

I purchased a banjo in **May** as a direct result of [goal factoring] and with
the intent of challenging [the first 20 hours]. The results were pretty
impressive, but I've hit a dip as of late.

In **June** I found myself begin programming again for fun, something I hadn't
done in years.

The summer was spent working, bonding with family I had never really had a
chance to, and reading books on psychology and neuroscience. I was really
interested in learning how my brain worked, and, more importantly, how it didn't.
My productivity *soared* as a result.

In **August** I found myself somewhat disappointed with the path my career was
taking, and so I decided to do something about it. I sat down and spent more
time on my resume than I had in totality over my lifetime. I deliberately
practiced my interviewing skills, and subsequently through the interviews to
some companies that I had always wanted to work for, but to which had been too
afraid to apply.

After months of growing uneasiness about owning a mobile phone, in **October** I
threw it into the depths of a lake, never to be found again. Environmentally
friendly? Probably not, but it's remarkable how much happier I am now that I'm
not a slave to it. [at time of editing, I have a new work phone and it sucks to
be back into the swing of things]

**November** came and went with such rapidity that I can't remember much about
it, and that's because I spent all of it [writing a novel]. I had attempted
[Nanowrimo] once before, last year, and only made it a little more than 20%,
despite having fewer time commitments. I wouldn't describe it as a good novel,
but hey, it's something.

[writing a novel]: /blog/nanowrimo-postmortem
[Nanowrimo]: http://nanowrimo.org/

As the year came to a close, in mid-**December** I attempted to free myself of
most of my possessions. Due to my school's co-op program, I move every four
months and it was becoming ever increasingly difficult to do so, and especially
stupid when I realized I had been moving three boxes around without ever looking
in them or even knowing what was inside. My possession count isn't yet
finalized, but I would estimate that it's somewhere around *110*, including
individual articles of clothing. [edit: the number is actually *107*]

### III. Meta

As cool as all of these successes are, 2013 was bigger than their sum. The theme
of the year was the knowledge that I could actually *do something with my life*
rather than just *live it*. It was incubated by seeing firsthand at CFAR how
relatively-little work could result in huge gains.

I realized that most people don't work any harder than they need to, which means
that a little effort will give you huge comparative advantage, to say nothing of
the gains of a large effort. To that end, I spent the year making an effort to
improve.

I systematically identified areas in my life where I didn't know very much and
could gain a lot from knowing a little bit more. Picking low hanging fruit was
definitely another theme of the year. In this respect, non-fiction will go a
very long way.

Finally, I also realized the value of eliminating cognitive burdens. I made a
move to David Allen's [Getting Things Done], attempted to automate as many
things as I could, and made some other improvements along these lines. In
particular I realized that maintaining relationships is a cognitive burden, and
that I shouldn't hold on to relationships with people I didn't expect to be
useful or whose company I didn't genuinely enjoy. Lots of people are in both
categories, but it was surprising how many were in neither.

[Getting Things Done]: http://www.davidco.com/

### IV. Books

In 2013 I reinstalled my reading habit, and read about 3x more books than I did
the year previous. Lots of these books were good, some of them were bad, but a
few in particular were so good that I would be doing you a disservice to reflect
on my year and not tell you about them.

Daniel Kahneman's book, [Thinking Fast and Slow] describes your brain and breaks
down the myth that humans are the "rational animal". In particular, it addresses
when we can and cannot trust our instincts, and surprising evidence about how we
model our happiness. I found myself amazed at the insight-density of it,
approximately two times every page I would stop and find it necessary to think
about the implications of something Kahneman had just said. Any synopsis of the
book I can give is necessarily doing a disservice to it, so please, just go read
it for yourself.

[Thinking Fast and Slow]: http://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Fast-Slow-Daniel-Kahneman/dp/0374533555

[Your Brain at Work], by David Rock, is in a similar vein to Thinking Fast and
Slow, but focuses more on the limitations of your mind and proven strategies to
work around these limitations. Each chapter begins with two fictional characters
living their everyday lives in a way that seems reasonable, and then follows up
with /what they did wrong and why/. Time after time I found myself surprised at
how wrong my strategies were after being corrected.

[Your Brain at Work]: http://www.amazon.com/Your-Brain-Work-Strategies-Distraction/dp/0061771295

[Mark Manson]'s [Models: Attract Women Through Honesty] is one of a very few
number of books which I wish I had read much sooner than I did. Manson debunks
all-too-common mindsets towards dating and proposes a much better alternative.
My love life skyrocketed after reading this book, and I found that the lessons
in it generalized well beyond the realm of dating.

[Mark Manson]: http://markmanson.net/
[Models: Attract Women Through Honesty]: http://www.amazon.com/Models-Attract-Women-Through-Honesty/dp/1463750358

In [So Good They Can't Ignore You], [Cal Newport] makes a very convincing
argument that it's not what you do that matters, but how you do it. Tearing
apart the myth that you should "do what you love", Newport presents a convincing
argument that instead of asking "what am I good at?" you should ask "what would
I be willing to be good at?". This book convinced me to strive harder in my
career, and within a month I had landed with an internship at Facebook -- not
too shabby for a few weeks' worth.

[Cal Newport]: http://calnewport.com/
[So Good They Can't Ignore You]: http://www.amazon.com/Good-They-Cant-Ignore-You/dp/1455509124

[Moonwalking with Einstein] made this list not because I am in love with it, but
because I think the book has extremely high value for most people. It's the true
story of a man who accidentally bumps into the field of competitive memory, and
his training over the next year to win in the national championship. I didn't
enjoy the story very much, but now that I am attempting to practice daily the
exercises in the book, my memory is significantly better.

[Moonwalking with Einstein]: http://www.amazon.com/Moonwalking-Einstein-Science-Remembering-Everything/dp/1594135312

### V. Fails

These are all awesome results to the year, but it wasn't as good as I've let you
come to believe. So, in the pursuit of transparency and in the spirit of
publishing negative results, let's take some time to look at the other things
that I tried this year, to varying degress of success.

Over reading week in **February**, I started a [polyphasic sleep] regiment. For
those with strong google-fu, there exist journals of the time period, which on
good authority, I have heard are quite funny.  Around the end of April I had
mostly adjusted, and, with some rather tumultuous results, managed to maintain
it until **July**.

[polyphasic sleep]: /blog/polyphasing

But then diaster struck and I couldn't find anywhere to nap at work. I made do
by going outside and sleeping on the lawn, but after I was told off by a
security guard, I began missing naps. Missing naps is a bad thing when you are
polyphasic, as it is the equivalent of missing a night of sleep for regular
people. The whole thing ended poorly.

Due to CFAR's influence, I started following Getting Things Done -- essentially
keeping track of eveything I need to do and figuring out effective ways of doing
it. While I kept up the facade of using GTD, by early **June** my heart was no
longer set on it, and by October I wouldn't use it whatsoever. Somehow I had
trained the bad habit of *not listening to it*, which kind of defeats the whole
point.

(caveat: I have reinstalled the habit and the first three weeks of it have been
going spectacularly. This will be something to look back on next year for
another postmortem.)

Along the same lines, I was in love with Beeminder last year, but kind of fell
off the horse when I learned the hard way that it doesn't seem to scale well to
large numbers of goals. When I had <7 it would be hugely successful and always
keep me motivated, but as I basked in the success of this, I often found myself
with 25 goals that I was attempting to juggle simultaneously, many of which I
don't think I had my heart set on.

This is a bad thing, and as I inevitably began failing my goals, I learned that
failing them wasn't all that bad, and I have been failing them ever since. I'm
attempting to hack my old mindset back by focusing on managing a small number of
goals, and this is working pretty well.

Waterloo's own local LessWrong meetup group also kind of fell apart last year,
but that is more than I want to write about here. Expect a forthcoming proper
postmortem on that topic. Including it just to be complete.

So that's it, that's 2013 in some amount of words. It was a fantastic year, but
I'm pretty sure this one is going to be better. By far.

What's yours going to look like?

