---
layout: post
title: "2014: Building Infrastructure"
date: 2015-01-01 10:24
comments: true
tags: life, results, analytics, science
---

{% previous 2013-in-review %}

## Overview

With 2014 now safely over, we may now gossip rudely behind its back. This post
is to serve as a postmortem on the year, to collect as much data about it,
review what went well, and see what we can do better for next time.

While 2013 was a year of collecting [low-hanging fruit][2013], for me, 2014 was
instead a year of *infrastructure-building*. I spent the last 365 days focusing
on three pillars: collecting knowledge, excelling in school, and building my
career.

On the knowledge front, I wanted to read *10 textbooks*, after accidentally
reading one last year and realizing it was *by far* the best way of getting up
to speed in a subject. Depending on what you count as being a "textbook", I read
[somewhere between 8 and 12][books], on subjects including writing, business and
negotiation, cognitive psychology, and a *wide range* of mathematics
(probability theory, set theory, category theory and game theory). The focus
here was on learning material I expected to be useful over the course of the
next three years. I consider this pillar to be a success.

Excelling in school, however, did not go very well, as it was perhaps poorly
thought out. I had precommitted (a \$200 payment in escrow to a friend should
I fail) to getting an average grade of >85% (an increase of about 12%) over my
penultimate school term. My motivation for this was the belief that high grades
would reflect a strong understanding of the course material. I found the actual
*mechanics* of receiving high-grades to be relatively easy, but had to slowly
watch as my motivation slipped away; many of my courses didn't strike me as
being worthwhile of which to have a strong understanding. Overall, I achieved
around 81% -- still a significant improvement -- but still ended up paying the
escrow.

My plans for the career pillar were to build lots of industry contacts, to have
high impact during my internships, and to land an awesome full-time job for
after graduation. The motivation for this pillar, of course, was that 2014 was
my last full year to concentrate on optimizing for a career before actually
*jumping into one*. I was looking for something interesting (to avoid burnout)
and highly lucrative ([to donate][earning]). I can't talk about my impact for
legal reasons, but I *can* say it was at least three orders of magnitude larger
than I would have ever dreamed. I'm in the final stages of landing a job, so
it's a little too soon to talk about that, but everything is looking really
promising and my expected salary skyrocketed by about 130% from what I would
have predicted last year. I consider this pillar to be *hugely successful*.

<!--more-->

Also, for some reason, during my new year planning for 2014 I decided I was
going to put out a rap CD. This didn't happen. I can't really remember why
I thought this would be a worthwhile use of my time, but I'm including it for
completeness.

A big highlight of the year was a ten-week excursion to eastern Europe during
what should have been an internship. I didn't find any jobs that I wanted in
a location that I wanted which would teach me things I wanted to know, so
I decided to better spend the time traveling. This was the best decision I've
ever made, and I learned more about myself in those ten weeks than I did in all
of 2012. I have lots more to say on my eurotrip, but it's relatively off-topic
for the purposes of this post.

[2013]: /blog/2013-in-review
[books]: https://www.goodreads.com/user_challenges/1183394
[earning]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earning_to_give


## Looking Forward

My plan for 2015 is to focus on consolidating power. I want to use the next year
to implement one new habit every two weeks, ranging from
[productivity strategies][nate], to mnemonics, covering better nutrition,
exercise and meditation in between. The plan is to write a blog post every two
weeks with a review of the new habit, and how well my previous habits have been
holding up. My first habit will be installation of a better quantified self
system: figuring out all of the analytics below was significantly harder than it
should have been. I think this is an especially good way to start, since it will
help track progress in future habits. I will write more on this in two weeks.

[nate]: http://mindingourway.com/productivity-through-self-loyalty/



## Analytics

Additionally, I spent the last week of 2014 collecting as many analytics on the
year as I could. I'm presenting them here as a part of my new transparency
initiative, and because I find them interesting as hell. There is way more
information here than you want to know about me, and not all of it is
flattering. Proceed carefully =) Most of these numbers are lower-bound
estimates, given that I didn't have a proper system to quantify any of it until
very recently. If you're a science teacher, don't spend too much time dwelling
on the significant digits; I didn't.



### Love
Sex partners:            6+2<br/>
People kissed:           14<br/>
People dated:            8<br/>
Tinder matches:          179<br/>
Tinder dates:            2<br/>
People who saw me naked: 24



### Money
Salary:          +28,800<br/>
Bitcoin profits: +11,976<br/>
Total income:    +43,537

Alcohol:         -625<br/>
Clothing:        -556<br/>
Groceries:       -1,090<br/>
Restaraunts:     -4,042<br/>
Flights:         -2,927<br/>
Europe Trip:     -7,739<br/>
Tuition:         -14,328<br/>
Lost bets:       -200<br/>
Donations:       -13,050 (45% of salary)<br/>
Total costs:     -82,675

Net income:      -26,162



### Social[^1]
Friends made:      171<br/>
Friends lost:      274<br/>
Net friends:       -103<br/>
Messages sent:     76,014<br/>
Messages received: 67,769<br/>
Words sent:        404,911 (avg: 5.3/msg)<br/>
Words received:    432,005 (avg: 6.4/msg)

[^1]: Using Facebook as a proxy for my social life.



### Travel
Flights:            26<br/>
Distance (plane):   42,480km<br/>
Distance (train):   2,030km<br/>
Distance (bus)[^2]: 2,863km<br/>
Distance (car):     2,081km<br/>
Distance (ferry):   600km<br/>
Distance (total):   49,651km

[^2]: This excludes getting around cities internally, because I didn't track
that and estimating it would be too difficult.



### Work
Productive hours:                1,109 (avg: 3.0h/day, 19.0% of waking life)<br/>
Source control commits:          439<br/>
Lines of code written:           19,635 (avg: 53.8/day, 44.7/commit)<br/>
Keystrokes:                      350,281[^3]<br/>
Clicks:                          34,835<br/>
API calls to generate analytics: 6,612

[^3]: These numbers are impossibly wrong; the software tracking them is rarely
ever running. I find this amazing because these numbers are still REALLY BIG.



### Publishing
Total blog posts:      21<br/>
Words published (blogs): 37,634 (avg: 103/day, 1792/post)<br/>
Words published (books): 8,025<br/>
Words published (total): 45,659 (avg: 125/day)



### Media
Songs played:                24,927 (avg: 68.3/day)<br/>
Books read:                  36<br/>
Average book rating:         3.1<br/>
Total insights from books:   1,440 (avg: 40/book)<br/>
Youtube videos watched:      2,463<br/>
Total time watching youtube: 557.8h (avg: 1.5/day, 13.6m/video)



### Vices
Beers[^4]:  316 (avg: 2.6/day)<br/>
Liquor: 97 (avg: 0.81/day)<br/>

[^4]: I only began tracking this metric in late August, but these numbers are
not representative of the year as a whole. Backpacking in Europe was a major
benefactor.



## Analysis

Some numbers here are particularly surprising to me, namely how much I spent on
restaurants, how long I spent watching TV, and just how many facebook messages
I send. Additionally, I had no idea just how **negative** my net income was.

Some recommendations to future-me: start a budget. My current spending strategy
is "does this save me more time than it would cost?", and if so, I buy it. From
a theoretical point of view, this is a good strategy, but it optimizes only
locally; for example, cooking in large batches would have been a better solution
than always eating out.

Also, I spent *how much time* watching TV last year?? There are **huge** wins to
be had here simply by replacing that with something even a little productive (I
generally don't find TV to be all that refreshing in terms of the maxima of
activity-space).

Notably missing from these numbers are email statistics (gmail's API was far too
frustrating for me to care enough to collect them), how much coffee I drink (way
too much), how much water I drink (far too little), *what I'm spending my
productive time doing*, what types of music I'm listening to, and actual sexual
encounters. I'd like to do some statistics on the data to see what is
correlated, to make better optimizations next year.

## Conclusion

All in all, it's been a pretty amazing year. It's not as radically different
from last as 2013 was from 2012, but that's to be expected when 2013 was focused
on finding low-hanging fruit. Subjectively I would rank 2014 as marginally
better from 2013, and as my best year to date. Let's hope this trend continues
next year too!

