---
layout: post
title: "Certainty by Construction Progress Report 8"
date: 2023-08-23 21:00
comments: true
tags: book, agda, progres report, certainty by construction
---

The following is a progress report for [Certainty by
Construction][cbc], a new book I'm
writing on learning and effectively wielding Agda. Writing a book is a tedious
and demoralizing process, so if this is the sort of thing you're excited about,
please do let me know!

[cbc]: https://leanpub.com/certainty-by-construction

---

Eight days away from my deadline. How's it going? Hectic.

I've been in a flurry of editing for the last two weeks. As of right now, I'm
currently editing page 138/252. At this rate, it's not looking promising, but I
did just buy a flat of Red Bull, so you never know.

Besides editing, what's new? Lots of minor typesetting stuff, like which
paragraphs should be indented. I also did a pass through all the Agda modules
with their new, final names, in easy searchable format. Along with that, the end
of each chapter now has an explicit export list, which subsequent chapters
import (rather than getting it from the stdlib.) This means you can see at a
glance whether a chapter has prerequisites you need to read first! Minor stuff,
but Nintendo polish nevertheless.

I had to rewrite a good chunk of chapter 2, and a lot of the prose in chapter 3
is from a very early edition of the book, and doesn't have the shine as the rest
of it. So that's getting reworked too. My hope is that the later chapters were
written more recently, and therefore will require less elbow grease. It's
plausible, and would be greatly appreciated. But I fear that the setoids chapter
needs a lot of work, and I'm just trying my best to ignore it. For now.

In other news, I'm now uploading nightly builds to [Leanpub][cbc] in order to
keep myself honest. There's no indication of which half of the book has been
edited and which hasn't, but that seems like a good idea I should adopt for the
next build. That way particularly dedicated readers could follow along and see
just how quickly I can get material cleaned up. And it will prevent me from
accidentally forgetting where I was and re-editing it all again. Which has
happened several times, somehow.

Okay that's enough of an update. Back to the grind. Love y'all.

