---
layout: post
title: "Certainty by Construction Progress Report 6"
date: 2023-07-14 15:30
comments: true
tags: book, agda, progres report, certainty by construction
---

The following is a progress report for [Certainty by
Construction][cbc], a new book I'm
writing on learning and effectively wielding Agda. Writing a book is a tedious
and demoralizing process, so if this is the sort of thing you're excited about,
please do let me know!

[cbc]: https://leanpub.com/certainty-by-construction

---

Aaaand we're back. Traveling was nice, but it's nicer to be home and being
productive and making things.

This week I did a lot of work on the isomorphisms chapter. First and foremost, I
proved that everything I knew about cardinalities from the Curry-Howard
isomorphism held true. That is, that sum types add the cardinalities of their
constituent types, product types multiply them, and by far the hardest to prove,
that functions act as exponentials.

Going through the work of that taught me that I haven't really internalized
everything I ought to have regarding setoids, since I originally framed the
problem wrong and needed Reed to help sort me out. There is some material in
this chapter about building the relevant setoids for all of the necessary types,
which sucks and would be better to avoid. I'm unsure if it will get moved out to
the setoid chapter, or if I'll just give a sketch in the final version, or maybe
if it just gets left where it is.

For me, the motivating use case behind the algebra of types is to find different
representations of things, ones with better computational properties. This turns
out to be extremely easy to exploit in Haskell, but upon trying to write about
it, I realized how much magic the Haskell runtime is doing in order to make that
happen. It's amazing that I'm still managing to trick myself into thinking I
understand things, even after working on this book for nearly a year. But I
suppose that's the whole purpose!

So anyway, that section isn't yet finished, but I think one more week will be
enough to tie it together. And at that point, I've written everything I intend
to, and will spend the remainder of my project time on editing, rewriting,
cleaning up, and tackling the weird typesetting problems that remain. The end is
nigh!

---

That's all for today. If you've already bought the book, you can get the
updates for free on [Leanpub][cbc]. If you haven't, might I suggest doing so?
Your early support and feedback helps inspire me and ensure the book is as good
as it can possibly be.




