---
layout: post
title: "Certainty by Construction Progress Report 1"
date: 2023-05-12 11:07
comments: true
tags: book, agda, progres report, certainty by construction
---

The following is a progress report for [Certainty by
Construction][cbc], a new book I'm
writing on learning and effectively wielding Agda. Writing a book is a tedious
and demoralizing process, so if this is the sort of thing you're excited about,
please do let me know!

[cbc]: https://leanpub.com/certainty-by-construction

---

As part of a new ~quarterly goal, I'm going to be publishing updates to
Certainty by Construction every Friday. This is for a few reasons: one, things
get done much more quickly when you're not doing them in private; two,
relatedly, it's good to get some exposure here and keep myself accountable.

Anyway, there are 26 new pages since last week, although a good deal of that is
code without any prose around it yet. I'm in the process of cannibalizing the
sections on relations and setoids into a single chapter. It's a discussion of
mathematical relations, their properties, an several examples. We explore
different pre-orders, partial orders and total orders, and have a length
digression about effectively designing indices for `data` types.

This last point arose from me spending a few hours trying to work out under
which circumstances exactly Agda gets confused about whether or not a computing
index will give rise to a constructor. My findings are that it's not really
about computing indices, so much as it is about Agda running out of variables in
which it can pack constraints. I suspect this knowledge can be exploited to make
more interesting constructors than I thought possible, but I haven't worked out
how to do it yet.

I've also been working on how to simplify some bigger setoid proofs, where you
have a bunch of equational reasoning you'd like to do under congruence. The
folklore on this is generally to introduce a lemma somewhere else, but this has
always struck me as a disappointing solution. Modulo the concrete syntax, this
seems to work pretty well:

```agda
_≈nested_[_]_
    : A
    → {f : A → A}
    → (cong : {x y : A} → x ≈ y → f x ≈ f y)
    → {x y z : A}
    → x IsRelatedTo y
    → f y IsRelatedTo z
    → f x IsRelatedTo z
_ ≈nested cong [ relTo x=y ] (relTo fy=z)
    = relTo (trans (cong x=y) fy=z)
infixr 2 _≈nested_[_]_
```

which lets you focus in on a particular sub-expression, and use a new equational
reasoning block to rewrite that, before popping your results back to the full
expression. As an example:

```agda
  ⌊ ((a *H c) *x+ 0#) +H b *S c +H d *S a ⌋ * x + b * d
≈nested (+-congʳ ∘ *-congʳ) [  -- focus on subexpr
  ⌊ ((a *H c) *x+ 0#) +H b *S c +H d *S a ⌋
≈⟨ +H-+-hom (((a *H c) *x+ 0#) +H b *S c) (d *S a) x ⟩
  ⌊((a *H c) *x+ 0#) +H b *S c ⌋ + ⟦ d *S a ⌋
≈⟨ +-congʳ (+H-+-hom ((a *H c) *x+ 0#) (b *S c) x) ⟩
  ⌊ a *H c ⌋ * x + 0# + ⌊ b *S c ⌋ + ⌊ d *S a ⌋
≈⟨ …via… *S-*-hom ⟩
  ⌊ a *H c ⌋ * x + (b * ⌊ c ⌋) + (d * ⌊ a ⌋)
≈⟨ +-congʳ (+-congʳ (*-congʳ (*H-*-hom a c x))) ⟩
  ⌊ a ⌋ * ⌊ c ⌋ * x + b * ⌊ c ⌋ + d * ⌊ a ⌋
∎ ]                            -- pop back
  (⌊ a ⌋ * ⌊ c ⌋ * x + b * ⌊ c ⌋ + d * ⌊ a ⌋) * x + (b * d)
```

The attentive reader here will notice that I have also clearly been improving
the chapter on ring solving. Maybe I'm just better at proofs these days, but the
whole thing feels much less challenging than my first few times looking at it.

---

Anyway, that's all for today. If you've already bought the book, you can get the
updates for free on [Leanpub][cbc]. If you haven't, might I suggest doing so?
Your early support and feedback helps inspire me and ensure the book is as good
as it can possibly be.

