---
layout: post
title: "Certainty by Construction Progress Report 3"
date: 2023-05-25 19:40
comments: true
tags: book, agda, progres report, certainty by construction
---

The following is a progress report for [Certainty by
Construction][cbc], a new book I'm
writing on learning and effectively wielding Agda. Writing a book is a tedious
and demoralizing process, so if this is the sort of thing you're excited about,
please do let me know!

[cbc]: https://leanpub.com/certainty-by-construction

---

Week three, and this update is coming in hot, a whole day early! This week I
worked on the ring solving chapter, realizing that I can make a very much
non-toy solver, and pack it into a chapter. We now build a multivariate semiring
solver, discuss how and why it works, and then do some dependent-type
shenanigans to put a delightful user interface in front of the whole thing.

In addition, it came with some excellent opportunities to discuss where
semantics come from, and let me talk about homomorphisms earlier than I was
otherwise hoping to.

My plan for the week was to tackle the remainder of the setoids chapter, but
setoids are awful and it's hard to motivate myself to do that, since I avoid
using them in my day-to-day life whenever I can. Which is always. We'll see what
happens with this chapter, but maybe it'll get melted down into something else.
Nevertheless, understanding setoids *is* important for actually doing anything
with the stdlib, so I dunno.

On the typesetting front, I spent an hour today fighting with Latex trying to
ensure that it has glyphs for every unicode character in the book. I've got all
but one of them sorted out now, and in the process, learned way more about
Latex than any human should need to know.

The plan for next week is to cleanup the extremely WIP backmatter chapters.
There's a bunch of crap in there about me trying to do math math and failing,
because math math doesn't give two sniffs about constructability, and so none of
it works out. If I'm feeling particularly plucky, I might try my hand at
defining the reals, just because it might be fun.

As of today's update, the book is now 360 pages long! I estimate it'll be about
450 when it's done, so we're clearly  making progress.

---

Anyway, that's all for today. If you've already bought the book, you can get the
updates for free on [Leanpub][cbc]. If you haven't, might I suggest doing so?
Your early support and feedback helps inspire me and ensure the book is as good
as it can possibly be.



