---
layout: post
title: "Certainty by Construction Progress Report 7"
date: 2023-08-12 23:45
comments: true
tags: book, agda, progres report, certainty by construction
---

The following is a progress report for [Certainty by
Construction][cbc], a new book I'm
writing on learning and effectively wielding Agda. Writing a book is a tedious
and demoralizing process, so if this is the sort of thing you're excited about,
please do let me know!

[cbc]: https://leanpub.com/certainty-by-construction

---

Where has this dingus Sandy been?? Busy busy busy! I'm in the middle of planning
a wedding (my own), as well as just finished being the best man at my friend's
wedding. Plus getting the tax man's records all sorted out for him, and a bunch
of other things that fell into the "urgent" AND "important" categories.

Yeesh. Enough excuses though. I'm back and haven't given up on any of this!

These days I'm calling the book "essentially done," and all that is required is
extensive editing. Which I've been doing. Every day on the bus I'm reading my
PDF copy and making notes in the margin. Then I get home and go through the
notes and clean up the prose.

It's slow going, but that's the way of the world. The prose is getting
dramatically tightened up, however. It's kind of fun to go through, be aware of
the point I'm trying to make, and realize that I haven't actually made it. I'm
not calling this "rewriting," but most paragraphs are changing dramatically.

Today I also sat down and hashed out a bunch of the technical pipeline issues
I've been putting off for a year. Like getting section references working. So
now instead of saying "as in **sec:propeq?**", the prose now says "as in section
3.2". The annotations have always been there, but getting the build to actually
put in the text has taken away several hours of my life.

More excitingly, I also managed to get inline code snippets properly
highlighted---and, even better, *broken code* now also highlights. This is a
resounding achievement, because the whole idea of literate Agda is that it must
compile. And the compiler is what generates the syntax highlighting. It's a
terrifying marvel of engineering, but it does work.

So that's all. I'm just going to push on this book thing until it's done. Or
until September 1. Whichever comes sooner. That's a terrifying thought, so I
guess I'd better get back to it.
