---
layout: post
title: "Certainty by Construction Progress Report 2"
date: 2023-05-18 23:24
comments: true
tags: book, agda, progres report, certainty by construction
---

The following is a progress report for [Certainty by
Construction][cbc], a new book I'm
writing on learning and effectively wielding Agda. Writing a book is a tedious
and demoralizing process, so if this is the sort of thing you're excited about,
please do let me know!

[cbc]: https://leanpub.com/certainty-by-construction

---

It's week two of regular updates on Certainty by Construction, baby! This week I
made 17 commits to the repository, half of which were towards the goal of
improving the book's typesetting. Spurred on by a bug report asking "what the
hell does `AgdaCmd:MakeCase` mean?" I decided to upgrade the book's build
system. Now you should see explicit keystrokes to press when the book asks you
to run a command alongside.

You'll also notice intra-prose syntax highlighting, meaning that if the book
mentions a type, it will now be presented in a beautiful blue, among other
things in other colors. Agda has some janky support for this, but I couldn't get
it working, which means I annotated each and every piece of syntax highlighting
by hand. Please file a bug if you notice I've missed any.

Content-wise, the old chapter on "structured sets" has become "relations", and
it has several new sections fleshing out the idea and giving several more
examples. I'm now in the middle of rewriting the setoids chapter, but it too has
three new sections, and thus the whole thing is no longer *all* about modular
arithmetic.

Next week I'm going to continue powering on with the setoids chapter---including
a big digression on what congruence entails under a setoid---and then I think
I'll tackle the ring solving chapter.

For the first time, this book seems like I might not be working on it for the
rest of my life. It's nowhere near done, but the topic and style are finally
hashed out, and the content is mostly in an alpha state. From here it's really
just to continue grinding, rewriting all the crap bits over and over again,
until they're no longer crap.

---

Anyway, that's all for today. If you've already bought the book, you can get the
updates for free on [Leanpub][cbc]. If you haven't, might I suggest doing so?
Your early support and feedback helps inspire me and ensure the book is as good
as it can possibly be.


