---
layout: post
title: Latches
date: 2016-11-09 20:00
comments: true
tags:
---

In the last chapter, we discussed multiplexing and demultiplexing --
respectively merging and splitting many streams of information over a single
pipeline. As previously hinted, we're getting surprisingly close to having all
of the pieces in place to make an honest-to-goodness computer.

We don't plan to stop there, it's just that we'll need one in order to jump to
the next level of abstraction; dealing directly with wires is so *barbarian*.

But we're not there yet. Today we set our sights on coming up with a way of
representing *changes over time* in our machine diagrams. This is a harder
problem than it sounds, because we don't even have a notion of time yet. Our
machine diagrams are defined in terms of *function tables*, which, as we've
repeatedly stressed, *always provide the same output given the same input*.
They're not allowed to do anything except for syntactic manipulation of values
on the underlying wires.

And so, it would seem, we find ourselves at an impasse. We could obviously just
loosen the constraints on what our function tables are allowed to do, but this
is undesirable for two reasons:

The first is that ensuring our machines depend on nothing but their inputs means
they are easy to reason about, and can always be decomposed and recomposed to
and from their constituent parts. Because function tables must depend only on
their inputs, this kind of reasoning is safe to do, since no externalities in
the system can influence our analysis.

The more practical reason is that it's not even clear how we would *allow*
function tables to do these crazy things that don't depend on their input, like
determine whether it's Tuesday. Half the time I'm not entirely convinced about
whether or not today is Tuesday; I usually resolve the question by asking
someone. Again, we get a win from parsimony on this one; "Tuesday" and most
other arbitrary things you can ask about are very obviously *human concepts*.
Humans are great and all, but we shouldn't expect the universe to fundamentally
agree with us that time should be subdivided into seven units, upon which our
machines behave differently.

So, how can we make a machine whose future depends on its past? Easy. Consider
the following simplified example:

```{#simple}
circuit = labeled "Hold" $ runCircuit $ void $ do
  or <- liftDia orGate
  c <- liftDia con
  input <- liftDia wire
  done <- liftDia wire
  orOut <- liftDia wire
  orDown <- liftDia $ scale 2 <$> vwire
  assertSame or (In 0) input (Out 0)
  assertSame or (Out 0) orOut (In 0)
  assertSame orOut (Out 0) orDown (In 0)
  assertSame orOut (Out 0) done (In 0)
  assertSame c Split orOut (Out 0)
  b <- aligning bend Split (or, In 1) (orDown, Out 0)
  arr (b, Split) (or, In 1)
  arr (b, Split) (orDown, Out 0)
```

Whoa. This `Hold` machine outputs a 0 at first, but a 1 forever after its input
has been raised high. What we've done is created a **feedback loop** from this
machine's output to its input. Somehow the output of this machine is *defined in
terms of itself*, which is actually pretty spooky if you think about it.

It will be informative to look at this machine's function table, since it is a
little different than we are used to seeing.

| Input | Last Output | Next Output |
|:-----:|:-----------:|:-----------:|
| 0     | 0           | 0           |
| 0     | 1           | 1           |
| 1     | 1           | 1           |
| 1     | 0           | 1           |

We've cleverly snuck around our limitation of requiring a function table to
depend only on its inputs by splitting its output into its *last output* and its
*next output*.

The very labeling of *last* and *next* outputs is informative; it strongly
suggests that these machines can change over time, so long as their inputs
change over time. And this makes sense; if some external force influences our
wires (eg. maybe the user presses a button), we want our systems to react to
that stimulus.

Feedback is actually a really interesting phenomenon. We can use it to implement
rather exotic things, like a clock:

```{#clock}
circuit = labeled "Clock" $ runCircuit $ void $ do
  or <- liftDia $ (spacer |||) <$> notGate
  c <- liftDia con
  done <- liftDia wire
  orOut <- liftDia wire
  orDown <- liftDia $ scale 2 <$> vwire
  assertSame or (Out 0) orOut (In 0)
  assertSame orOut (Out 0) orDown (In 0)
  assertSame orOut (Out 0) done (In 0)
  assertSame c Split orOut (Out 0)
  b <- aligning bend Split (or, In 0) (orDown, Out 0)
  arr (b, Split) (or, In 0)
  arr (b, Split) (orDown, Out 0)
```

This is not a "clock" in the usual human sense, but more in the sense of "it
ticks and it tocks and in general could be used to measure time if you knew how
fast it was ticking".

| Last Output | Next Output |
|:-----------:|:-----------:|
| 0           | 1           |
| 1           | 0           |

Neat. So with a couple of these examples under our belt, let's build something
useful. There is a canonical first impression of these things, and it looks like
this:

```{#rs}
circuit = labeled "RS" $ runCircuit $ void $ do
  nor1 <- liftDia norGate
  nor1out <- liftDia wire
  nor1in <- liftDia vwire
  c <- liftDia $ (\x -> x ||| inputWire ||| wireLabel "Q") <$> con
  nor2 <- liftDia norGate
  nor2out <- liftDia wire
  nor2in <- liftDia vwire
  liftCircuit $ constrainWith (vsep 1) [nor1, nor2]
  assertSame nor1 (Out 0) nor1out (In 0)
  assertSame nor2 (Out 0) nor2out (In 0)
  assertSame nor1 (In 1) nor1in (In 0)
  assertSame nor2 (In 0) nor2in (Out 0)
  assertSame c Split nor1out (Out 0)
  in1 <- liftDia $ (wireLabel "R" |||) <$> wire
  in2 <- liftDia $ (wireLabel "S" |||) <$> wire
  s1 <- liftDia vwire
  s2 <- liftDia vwire
  assertSame s1 (In 0) nor1out (Out 0)
  assertSame s2 (Out 0) nor2out (Out 0)
  assertSame in1 (Out 0) nor1 (In 0)
  assertSame in2 (Out 0) nor2 (In 1)
  arr (nor1in, Out 0) (s2, In 0)
  arr (nor2in, In 0) (s1, Out 0)
```

This is known as an `RS` latch. A useful mnemonic for keeping track of what it
does is that the `S` stands for "set" and the `R` stands for "reset". Which is
to say, that raising the `S` input will "set" the latch, and keep output `Q` be
1, while raising the `R` input will "reset" the latch and return the output to
0.

Its function table, if you're into that kind of thing, is presented here:

| R | S | Last Q | Next Q  |
|:-:|:-:|:------:|:-------:|
| 0 | 0 | 0      | 0       |
| 0 | 0 | 1      | 1       |
| 0 | 1 | 1      | 1       |
| 0 | 1 | 0      | 1       |
| 1 | 0 | 0      | 0       |
| 1 | 0 | 1      | 0       |
| 1 | 1 | 1      | Invalid |
| 1 | 1 | 0      | Invalid |

What's this "invalid" stuff? Well, setting both `R` and `S` high makes both of
the `nor` gates output a 0, which if you trace the diagram will cause crazy
behavior in our output `Q`, and break the semantic model we have of what it
means to "set" or "reset" this thing.

The function table is kind of gnarly, so we can also write it like the
following, which helps to convey the *semantics* of what we're trying to
accomplish:

| R | S | Q |
|:-:|:-:|:--|
| 0 | 0 | No Change |
| 0 | 1 | 0         |
| 1 | 1 | Invalid   |
| 1 | 0 | 1         |

where "No Change" obviously indicates `Next Q = Last Q`.

The `RS` machine is our first exposure to **latches**: machines which hold some
kind of "state" depending on what has happened in the past. In this case, `RS`
remembers which of `R` or `S` was most recently high. As such, we can think of
it as having a some **memory**. Indeed, the `RS` latch stores one bit of
information for us.

Unfortunately, the `RS` latch is finicky. Whenever you see an *Invalid* set of
inputs, you should become very worried, because of Murphy's law: despite your
best efforts, something will cause the illegal combination of inputs, and the
rest of our machine will explode -- either logically, or in some cases of real
electronics, physically.

What we'd really like to do is to provide some sort of "interface" to the `RS`
latch, which *guarantees* that `R` and `S` can't possibly be high
simultaneously. The only way to ensure that is if the input to `R` were somehow
derived from the `not` of the input to `S`. But, if that were the case, we'd
also want another wire `and`ed against both of them, to prevent the latch from
toggling indefinitely.

```{#snap}
circuit = labeled "Snap" $ runCircuit $ void $ do
  split <- liftDia $ machine [""] ["-", "+"] "Split"
  and1 <- liftDia $ scale 0.6 <$> andGate
  and2 <- liftDia $ scale 0.6 <$> andGate
  assertSame split (Named "-") and1 (In 1)
  assertSame split (Named "+") and2 (In 0)
  c <- aligning ((labeledWire "S" |||) <$> con) Split (split, In 0) (and1, In 0)
  b <- aligning bend Split (c, Split) (and2, In 1)
  input <- liftDia $ (wireLabel "V" |||) <$> wire
  assertSame input (Out 0) split (In 0)
  arr (c, Split) (b, Split)
  arr (c, Split) (and1, In 0)
  arr (b, Split) (and2, In 1)
  rs <- liftDia $ (\x -> x ||| inputWire ||| wireLabel "Q") <$> machine ["R", "S"] ["Q"] "RS"
  liftCircuit $ constrainWith (hsep 1.3) [split, rs]
  arr (and1, Out 0) (rs, In 0)
  arr (and2, Out 0) (rs, In 1)
```

The `Snap` machine is exactly this interface we desire. As you might expect from
the name, `Snap` takes a *snapshot* of `V` ("value") whenever `S` ("set") is
high. Behind the scenes, `Snap` is nothing more than a fancy `RS` latch, but now
we've guaranteed that we can't possibly toggle the illegal input condition on
the latch. Our semantic function table for `Snap` looks like this:

| S | Q         |
|:-:|:---------:|
| 0 | No Change |
| 1 | **V**     |

Of course, being able to store a single bit isn't particularly useful.
Thankfully, as usual, multiwires give us a convenient way of "lifting"
single-wire machines to multi-wire machines. Thus, we present `Snap*`, a
*polymorphic* snapshot machine capable of taking a snapshot of an entire
multiwire at once:

```{#snap_nybble}
circuit = labeled "Snap*" $ runCircuit $ void $ do
  snap <- liftDia $ (\x -> x ||| sspacer # scale 0.5 ||| inputMulti ||| wireLabel ":n") <$> machine' [inputWire, outputMulti] ["S", "V"] ["Q"] "Snap"
  d <- liftDia $ const $ vspacer # scale 0.6
  spaceV 0.1 snap d
  input1 <- liftDia $ scale 2.2 <$> wire
  input2 <- liftDia $ multiIn ":n"
  assertSame input1 (Out 0) snap (In 0)
  assertSame input2 (Out 0) snap (In 1)
  return ()
```

It's worthwhile to stop and think about how far we've come, and exactly how many
little details are hiding away inside of this simple diagram for `Snap*`. The
multiwire makes `n` copies of the internal `Snap`, which itself contains two
machines. We've managed to pack an incredible amount of *machinery* into this
one diagram, and the functionality of it is no longer anywhere close to being
"trivial". We really and truly have designed something worthwhile here, both in
terms of `Snap*` and in terms of the abstraction tools we've built in order to
actually describe it.

Something that might further pique your intrigue is that we are *nowhere near*
the limit of the abstraction tools we'll have built by the end of this book.
We're still just getting started.

In the next chapter, we'll build big blocks of these `Snap*` machines, capable
of storing many different nybbles simultaneously. We'll further design machinery
to *read* and *write* from any particular cell in this snapshot block, at which
point we'll have a working memory component for our computer.

