---
layout: post
title: Why I Quit
date: 2015-11-15 19:19
comments: true
tags: november, regret, story
---

Oh god am I behind on blogging. Mexico was cool, but I hadn't brought my private
key, and like most cron jobs do, the cron job I'd set up to publish new content
remotely failed to run. There's something to be said about the rush of shipping
things; it feels really good and is a great motivator to continue working. With
my cron job down, I no longer had any immediate feedback on my work, and with
all the other distractions around, blogging suffered for it.

In cron's defense, I managed to remember that cron runs in a weird pwd, and so I
took matters into my own hands and wrote a quick bash script to normalize the
environment. Turns out I forgot to chmod the executable bit on this flag, thus
the lack of content over the last week. Whoops. One more thing to remember in
the long journey of ascension to sysadminship.

Let's get to brass tacks, though. You're not here to read about why I haven't
been writing. You're here to read the things I have written. And because I'm
very (~10k) words behind, I'm going to write the first thing that comes to mind
that I think I can quickly exploit for word-count. I fully expect this one to
fall under my new tag for things I'll later [regret][regret] writing, but that
sounds like something for future Sandy to regret.

[regret]: http://sandymaguire.me/tags/regret.html

So today I want to talk about illegal drugs; how I got into them, and
ultimately, how I got out. Let's hope that this doesn't affect my visa status.
To that end, I would like to firmly state that I am clean now, and have been for
four years.

This is my story.

---

Until a few weeks before my nineteenth birthday, I was blissfully ignorant of
life's many vices. I knew they existed, on the periphery of my awareness, but I
didn't really get it. "I'm too smart to ruin my brain," was something I
distinctly remember saying. It was partly to appease adults (and boy, did it
ever), but it was also mostly true. I took myself very seriously, and the idea
of getting out of control was absurd. Why would I want to have less judgment or
ability? It just didn't make sense.

Pure as the driven snow, I was. I didn't party, drink coffee or alcohol, touch
any drugs harder than legally prescribed T3s, or to my immense shame and
overwhelming disappointment, have any sex. I was a classic [Nice Guy][niceguy]:
raised with staunchly feminist values, lacked confidence, found myself somewhere
gently on the autism spectrum, and took myself very seriously. A set of traits
not highly amenable to getting laid in high school, as you might imagine.

[niceguy]: http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Nice_Guy_syndrome

That's not to say, however, that I was immensely unpopular, either in social
circles or in love. I managed to find a few girlfriends, although in retrospect
they all had a distinctive type: small brunettes with an exceptionally religious
upbringing. It's not fair to read too much into the people we were when we were
teenagers, so I won't dwell too much further, but I think it's important to
establish the setting. I had a few opportunities at real, honest-to-goodness
sex, but they were all qualified with statements along the lines of "well, ok,
but hope I won't hate myself forever afterwards." Needless to say, it never
happened.

Years of sexual and social frustration followed.

A few months before my nineteenth birthday, however, I somehow managed to be
invited to the graduation party of an all-girls school. "It's now or never," I
thought. I was kinda a douche back then. [I hope I'm less so now][letter].
Regardless, I arranged to own some drinks for the party, and spent the weekend
having the time of my life. In the span of two days, I met fifty new people, all
of whom were super friendly, most of whom were attractive girls, and some of
whom seemed to like me. And so my first party mixed up a few signals in my head:
fast friendships, alcohol, and some degree of sexual success.

[letter]: http://sandymaguire.me/blog/letter-to-myself

In particular, however, what I realized was that alcohol wasn't as terrible as I
had previously imagined. It was kinda fun, even. It lowered my inhibitions, let
me talk to people, and get into crazy situations that everyone thought were
really funny afterwards. Alcohol wasn't this terrible drug that all the
responsible people in my life had told me. And being good at math, I
extrapolated from that: maybe the other ones aren't as terrible either?

I had decided to take the year following high school off. The idea was to go
traveling, but that didn't really happen, and so I sat around in my small
hometown, wasting away while most of my friends moved on to greener pastures. I
made new friends, many of whom were what you might describe as "pro-marijuana".
They invited me over to try some, and I remember it as being a very magical
experience. It removed the constant disassociation between my mind and my
senses; textiles felt *interesting*, music was *vivid*, and for the first time
ever, I felt like I was really *seeing* what was in front of my eyes, rather
than interpreting it through my weird mind.

All in all, it was pretty cool. And what might have been the best part was that
it turned off my neuroses for a few hours. That was big. Really big. For those
of you without hardcore neuroses, the best way I can describe it is like
spending a day on the beach with no responsibilities after eighteen long years
of constantly having your attention pulled in a million ways as you attempt to
understand *everything*. It was nice. It was relaxing.

Combined with being in a town I hated, with the majority of my friends gone,
working a shit job and watching my potential waste away, marijuana was a great
way to escape from everything. In retrospect, I was self-medicating for pretty
serious depression, but unfortunately for me, I didn't know that. I spent the
next year spending all of my full-time income on either getting drunk or getting
high. I didn't come away with a lot to show for it. Somehow I made it into
university, which was honestly amazing, but that just brought harder[^1] and more
interesting drugs into the equation.

The only thing that had stopped me from getting into them sooner was a fantastic
friend who was the only person in my life brave enough to tell me he didn't like
the person I was becoming. His lone voice was one that I depended on years
later, when I decided to stop all of this madness. But I'm getting ahead of
myself.

[^1]: I intentionally stayed away from all the addictive ones though. I might
have been dumb, but I wasn't *that* dumb.

And so it went. With a few brief stints in the midsts, I spent almost three
years of my life smoking marijuana every day, with harder things on the
weekends. The harder stuff came as a poorly-thought-out experiment. I had been
studying [rationality][lesswrong] pretty seriously by this point, and a core
piece of rationality is that your art will desert you when you need it most.
Rather ironically, I decided to take some strong hallucinogens and see if I
could still reason my way of out impaired mind-states. I consider myself a
psychonaut and kept a journal detailing what I had taken, how much, when, the
experience it gave me, and my thoughts while on it.

[lesswrong]: https://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Sequences

For those of you interested, I *could* reason my way through drug-induced
mind-states, but it stopped being as important. Soon this too became just
another means of escaping from life.

Despite keeping that journal, I never actually read it when sober. I kept my
notes in a big spooky grimoire which seemed appropriate; it was vaguely
wizard-themed. One day while packing up over the holidays to move, I decided to
go through it, just for fun. What I found was honestly terrifying.

I had written messages to myself, messages that at the time I thought were
imperative to communicate to sober-me. I don't have the journal anymore, and so
unfortunately I can't quote it verbatim, but it was along the lines of "this is
a living hell. Why are you subjecting me to this? <u>stop taking drugs</u>." I
had written this a few months before reading it, taking drugs the whole while.

There are very few words in the English language to express the thoughts that
went through my head as I read that, but "oh fuck" comes pretty close. I was
inadvertently doing the whole Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde thing. It's an interesting
story, but it's literally terrifying when it's *you* living a secret double
life.

I guess this is what they call *hitting rock bottom*.

Over the New Years which began 2012, I decided to quit drugs once and for all. I
gave up the remainder of my hard drugs (which were hard to find), flushed my
marijuana and deleted any contacts I had who might be able to get it for me
(since it wasn't very hard to find). I decided to return to my ascetic life, and
at the same time I gave up alcohol, though that was only to be temporary.

Quitting was surprisingly easy, honestly. I managed to convince myself overnight
that not only was I not doing drugs, and that I didn't want to do drugs, but
also that I didn't even *want to want* to do drugs. I developed a defense
mechanism: anytime anybody said anything about drugs, I would tell them that
"drugs are bad. Don't do drugs." Every single time, regardless of the drug in
question. Brains are weird, and highly sensitive to consistency, and I wholly
suspect that it was this consistency that gave me the mental fortitude to pull
myself out. I firmly suspect that until you *want* to stop, you won't be able
to, regardless of the external pressure. I did it for myself, and only for
myself.

What also made quitting easy was that giving up marijuana was fantastic. It's
sincerely the best thing I've ever done, and I realized that a few days into my
new sobriety. All of a sudden, I had an extra two hours *every day* in which I
could do things because I wasn't so high that activity was challenging. That
worked out to an entire extra *month* of my life every *year* that I was
throwing away in a misguided attempt to escape from depression.

I quickly started getting back into hobbies. I read more, because I was suddenly
capable of remembering more than two sentences at a time. I bought a piano and
started practicing again. I started new projects, and I even finished some. What
was perhaps most exciting, was that I made some new friends, and we did things
other than sitting around mindlessly watching TV with no commentary other than
"I am *so* high right now." Yes, things were good.

But I started noticing some of the more subtle things that drugs had done to me.
In my three years abusing drugs, I had stopped being interesting, because I had
stopped doing interesting things. I didn't know how to have fun anymore, because
drugs made everything fun; it was fun to sit and wave my hand around; it was fun
to have discussions with people who were talking about something completely
different and neither of us realized it. I can't describe the level of
embarrassment I feel at time of writing, that this was the person I let myself
become.

Eighteen months later, I finally noticed that I could think again. Without
realizing it, my mental agility had atrophied, because I never needed to use it.
It took eighteen months before I finally felt like my brain was back up to
speed, concentration and clarity. That's a horrifyingly long time, especially
when you remember that I didn't realize it until it was gone.

As of late I've started to think that I might have an alcohol problem. I took
some time off a few weeks ago when I realized that I got *really grumpy* on days
that I didn't have a drink. That scared me. That really scared me. I'm not there
yet, but I can feel a force inside of me getting ready to pull the plug on
alcohol forever like I've pulled it on drugs. It's slow going, because like it
or not, alcohol does have a place in modern culture and contemporary society. I
haven't yet convinced myself that I don't want to want to drink, but I think the
more meta-levels above that *have* stabilized. I'm getting there. New Years
might be a good, symbolic time to make it happen. Sounds like a good project for
2016.

Part of the reason I've written this was to spit out lots of words, but there's
also a more practical goal. I still have a lot of friends who abuse drugs, and
it breaks my heart to watch. It's their lives, and they can do whatever they
please with it, I know, but I needed to do something. Lots of them seem to
legitimately want to stop, but can't, and so it might be helpful to have a case
study in what has worked, even if possibly only once.

It would be emotionally distressing to calculate just how much potential I
wasted during this period of my life, but it did come with a benefit: when I got
out, I knew I was behind, and that helped me work my ass off. All of the great
things that my agency has achieved in the last four years are due to this vague
dissatisfaction in the back of my mind that I needed to make up for lost time. I
suspect I'm more productive for it, both in terms of my employment and in terms
of my life. These days, my life is the best it's ever been, and I strongly
suspect a large part of that is because I can still remember how terrible life
can get, and I've been trying to distance myself from that as hard as possible.

That's not to say I'd do it again, though, given the chance.

Usually I like to wrap up these posts with a "present": something that makes the
reader go away feeling good, or remembering me as being very clever. It's a neat
hack to exploit the [peak-end rule][peak]. I've got nothing like that for today,
but instead would like to end with a shout-out to my friend Ian Lewis, the man
who didn't like the person I was becoming. Thanks for saving my life dude. I owe
you one.

[peak]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peak%E2%80%93end_rule
