---
layout: post
title: 2015 in Review
date: 2016-01-24 23:41
comments: true
tags: life, postmortem
---

Now that 2016 is finally upon us, I want to take some time aside and do my
third annual yearly postmortem. January is mostly over, so apparently
punctuality isn't one of my greatest strengths in this lovely world of ours. I
figured I'd better take some initiative and push this thing out before I get
embarrassed about having not done it and let it slide silently off into the
mists of time.

Better late than never; better done than perfect.

Winter term -- back to school, met Christina
signed a job with google
Took compilers class, rolled that bitch
Nonstop work on FYDP
Won 2nd place in a yelp competition for cool software -- accio
Broke up with Christina
dove headfirst into haskell
became an engineer for real
helped brian with his company

Spring term -- UK
met up with rory in london
fucking awesome adventures
some favorite memories:
    - picking up random magda in manchester
    - 10 pin bowling in bristol. going up and down that fucking hill
    - hearing stories about some german girls who had lost their passport all
        throughout our travels
    - hiking arthur's seat
    - spur of the moment tattoo in galway
    - meeting randos in belfast and ending up being best friends in edinburgh

after too short a time, rory and i went our separate ways
i went to berlin for the LWCW
    - it was ok
    - but most of the straw that broke the camel's back
    - i'm not really in the LW scene anymore. i don't care about EA or veganism
        or any of the other causes du jour
    - that being said it was a fun weekend and i met a lot of cool people
    - and did improv singing

in a moment of terror, realized i had run out of money. luckily i still had some
america, but had another two months to kill before i could make any more

so i headed off to lithuania, a country i loved
intending to live in a hostel for two months for 8 euros a night. (including
    breakfast)
accidentally reunited with some of the people i had met last time around
accidentally didn't become friends with them immediately
met cool people
broke into a planetarium. charmed our way out despite a language boundary
broke into a library by pretending to be students, despite a language boundary
met a bunch of kiwis i fucking loved
went to midsummer festival
    - set things on fire
    - jumped over fires
    - learned traditional lithuanian folk dances
    - watched with a bit of jealousy as the girls sent firey wreaths down the
        river to find their husbands
    - didn't find any blooming ferns, unfortunately
    - walked 15km home
    - spent the morning talking shit trying to watch a sunset

moved into a new place with an Argentinian guy and his lithuanian girlfriend
i was 100% certain they were con-men
    - didnt give me his real name
    - had 3 facebook accounts
    - made a bunch of fake facebook groups looking like they were hustling
        people into housing
    - he wasn't going to be there on the date of moving in
went for it regardless because i didnt have a choice
they turned out to be super cool
reunited with a friend from cornwall. it went weird.
went on my first lithuanian date. it went weird.
some canadian friends came to visit!

drunk twister

decided to tell the lithuanian girl that i liked that i liked her. it didn't go
well.
but we spent the night having snuck into the bigass tower in the middle of town,
staring up at the stars and talking about life.

the night of the persides we went up to the pagan place where the girls tried to
do a ritualistic sacrifice on me. spent the rest of the night staring up at the
stars, while the girls kept missing the shooting stars somehow

for my birthday, told people to share good memories with me. the girls got me a
steak for my birthday. we went to a lithuanian pun. i have literally never felt
as loved as i did that day.

watched a lithuanian movie with a bunch of lithuanians and foreigners. the
lithuanians thought it was a hoot. we didn't really get it.

cooked the steak the night i left. first time i had ever. pretty fucking good.
left lithuanian with a heavy heart.

went to iceland. hated it.

came back to waterloo
    - so weird with nobody there
    - hung out with some old friends, had some fantastic chats

finally off to SF
lived in corp housing. new job.
found a place in the city. didn't realize how bad the commute would be
my team keeps leaving so i am getting mad seniority
just starting to make new friends
WOW SO NICE TO HAVE A PLACE TO MYSELF
    - i can decorate! it will be here for longer than 4 months
    - i HAVE been here for longer than 4 months. the longest i've spent in any
        one place for five years. wtf.
picked up some new hobbies
    - guitar
    - painting
first real job
    - it's okay
    - hard to balance my bright eyed idealism with the real world

nanoblowrimo
    - not 100% successful but still a good effort
    - waaaay better response on some things than i have ever had before

went to mexico. met a girl i really liked
went to visit her over christmas. we broke up due to realizing life constraints
    are hard. that's rough, but i guess that's life
convinced rory to move to SF


----


feel like i've been slipping in effectiveness as of late. look at 2013 fuck i
was good at so many things. likely this is all low hanging fruit, but still.

i find myself consistently getting stuck in a rut without realizing it. a little
bit of analaysis makes it better, and that's awesome. i wish it happened less
often though.

part of this is just a lack of momentum i think. traveling makes it hard to
build infrastructure. i definitely feel like i'm starting to pick it up

did i accomplish my yearly goals? nope! not evne a little bit. that's okay,
becaues i think they were kind of silly. i have a huge amount of data i tracked
though. i'll present it later

usually i do a big big ~20 hour new-year preparation on what i want out of life.
i havent ogtten around to that yet. i dont think i will. i want to focus on LOVE
this year. do I? thats scary. yikes.

it would be nice to have a bigger plan to write here.


----


analyses

