---
layout: post
title: Stories from 2015
date: 2016-01-22 07:17
comments: true
tags: life, stories, review
---

Now that 2016 is finally upon us, I want to take some time aside and do my
third annual yearly postmortem. January is mostly over, so apparently
punctuality isn't one of my greatest strengths in this lovely world of ours. I
figured I'd better take some initiative and push this thing out before I get
embarrassed about having not done it and let it slide silently off into the
mists of time.

Better late than never; better done than perfect.

This post is organized into trimesters, because they happen to align pretty well
with the major events of the year. This is not a coincidence; the school year
has kept my life divided into trimesters for the last five years. Somehow, my
life stayed that way even after graduation. Maybe this artificial segmentation
will go away in 2016. I'm not really expecting it to; old habits are a lot like
Bruce Willis.



## Winter -- School

2015 kicked itself off with a bang: I signed a job with my dream company, and
met a woman. Pun unintentional, but not scratched out. Combined with a course
load consisting only of project work and bird courses, the school term turned
out to be pretty lovely.

The project work consisted of writing a [Java compiler][juicy]. You probably
don't know this about me (but you could probably guess if you've spent 5 minutes
talking to me about programming), but compilers turn me on in a way that women
don't. I'm not super sure what it is, but I started programming originally in
order to write a compiler. Finally getting a chance to do it was *really really
really* exciting. I dived in. Probably too hard. My initial progress alienated a
potential teammate, leaving what could-have-been-a-four-person-team with only
two members. It didn't matter. We were ahead of the class for the entire course.

My other project was the culmination of a few years work with some of my good
friends as a capstone project. We built a tool for software engineers that
sussed out the knowledge graph -- who knew what -- of an underlying codebase. We
thought it was pretty cool, and apparently so did Yelp because we placed 2nd in
a competition for cool projects. We lost out to a compiler. As you can imagine,
I was very ambivalent about this outcome.

I spent the rest of the year flirting with the idea of doing a startup around
this project, but ultimately decided I'm lacking the hustle to really make
anything of it. At this point the project is probably considered abandonware, so
[feel free to take a look][take2] if that kind of thing tickles your fancy.

There was a big symposium for all of the engineers to show off their cool
capstone projects. The woman I was seeing came to mine. I got distracted by my
compiler instead of going to hers. She didn't really understand how it could
happen; I didn't know how to explain it, and couldn't really blame her.

Things didn't work out between us.

Under the guidance of [Alex "Dr. Monad" Klen][klen], I started getting serious
about [Haskell][haskell]. It's changed my life, but I'm not entirely sure for
the better. Now I feel like a little bit of my soul dies every time I need to
write code that isn't Haskell, because [it's so *painful*][blub]. That's a good
thing because it means I'm smarter and more capable, but I don't get to code in
Haskell professionally so, well, I'm sure you can do the modus ponens.

Technically I unofficially graduated sometime during this trimester. But nobody
really cared, because the highlight of the term was pledging an oath on [honor
and cold iron][oath], a ceremony which signaled the end of my engineering
education. During a surprisingly non-cheesy ritual involving robes, chanting and
iron chains, I received my iron ring -- a symbol of the culmination of five long
years working towards becoming an engineer. Though I'm not an engineer under the
eyes of the law, I am under the eyes of other engineers, and that's really what
counts.

Foolishly, this ceremony was held only halfway through the trimester (after a
sexamester?), and so the rest of the academic term was what one might describe
as having been "phoned in."

[juicy]: https://github.com/isovector/juicy
[take2]: https://github.com/isovector/take2
[klen]: http://alexklen.com
[haskell]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haskell_(programming_language)
[blub]: http://www.paulgraham.com/avg.html
[oath]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ritual_of_the_Calling_of_an_Engineer



## Spring -- Travel

### Backpacking

With more wanderlust than I could manage during the winter, I somehow convinced
my best friend Rory to come backpacking in the UK with me. We spent two
months bumming around without a plan. It was terrific.

Traveling with a friend is a *very* different experience from traveling alone. I
think I prefer being alone, because it makes you take more chances and get into
more trouble. That being said, traveling with a friend is much more comfortable
and means you always have interesting conversation if you want it.

Rory and I got into too many adventures to recount here, but some of the
highlight teasers were:

- Joining a "10 pin bowling league" in Bristol with a batshit-crazy Australian
    named Ben who afterwards brought us out "to where the party's at", and
    subsequently managed to commit at least four felonies over the course of the
    night.
- Meeting some German girls who had lost their passports while doing the
    macarena, and hearing stories about them from random travelers over the next
    two months.
- Picking up the coolest girls in Manchester with the line "hey, want to party
    with [our ragamuffin group of disheveled travlers]," and getting kicked out
    of the club for not having cool enough shoes.
- Getting a spur-of-the-moment tattoo on a bank holiday in a seedy Irish tattoo
    parlor with some girls who didn't speak any English.
- Going on the world's most shit pub crawl in Belfast, lead by a sketchy guy who
    kept trying to give us "tattoos for really cheap". We went to two bars and
    were the only people at both, but met some fantastic locals who happened to
    be on our flight to Scotland the next morning, and spent a few days showing
    us around.
- Accidentally hiking up [Arthur's Seat][arthur] with a reunited travel friend
    who happened to be on a blind date, and hearing it described as "not the
    worst first date."

After too short a time (but what *felt* like eternity), Rory and I went our
separate ways. I headed to Berlin for the [LessWrong Community Weekend][lcwc] on
the recommendation of a woman I had once kissed. After being told in no
uncertain terms that she "didn't want or plan to kiss me again," the weekend
went pretty smoothly.

I think the community weekend was the straw that broke the camel's back, though,
as I realized I'm not really very interested in LessWrong anymore. I just don't
care about any of the *causes du jour*, and was kind of hoping to spend the
weekend talking about weird brain hacks and computability theory. Needless to
say, that didn't happen, but regardless I'm happy I went.

A big part of the reason I wanted to end up in the Bay for my job was because it
was so close to the rationalist scene. Awkward. But the Bay Area is pretty cool
so I guess I can't complain too much.

Halfway through the weekend, I realized I didn't have a plan for what to do
next, so I started looking at potential options. When I went to book a flight,
my credit card was declined and I realized that I hadn't checked my bank account
in some time. I logged in, and found I had negative four hundred dollars to my
name. Canadian.

Luckily I had accidentally stashed away some American money in a bank account
for rainy days. Further luckily I had brought that card. Upon inspection, it had
a little more than \$2000USD. Better than negative four hundred, but still not a
great fortune on which to live for the next two months. And somehow get a flight
home.

With immense amounts of shame, I emailed my mom asking her for enough money to
come home on. She was lovely and said yes, but *fuck.*  I'm 25 for fucks sake
and shouldn't need to be borrowing money from my parents. I borrowed it though,
because I'm not stupid and being illegally stuck somewhere is unequivocally a
stupid idea.

I booked a flight to Lithuania, which met my two desiderata for a country in
which to be: a) remarkably cheap, and b) some place I knew I wouldn't hate.
Seeing as I had accidentally spent an extra three weeks in Lithuania during my
last trip there, I figured I could probably rough it for two months.

[arthur]: http://nvaspeedoflight.org.uk/images/515c40d43195f-%C2%A9AlSmith_Oct11_rehearsall%20(42)%20RESIZED%20@%20191212.jpg
[lcwc]: http://lesswrong.com/lw/l4s/european_community_weekend_2015/


### Lithuania

The plan was to live in a hostel for two months. I knew a place. It was 8 euros
a night, including breakfast and all the flirting you could do with the
disinterested receptionists. Fortunately, after all of my failed attempts last
time around, the receptionists were all new. Unfortunately, despite my best
efforts, I didn't impress any of them this time around, just like the last time
around.

That meant the only people in Lithuania whom I might know were the tourism
girls. I headed off the next morning to the free walking tour, and was
recognized immediately by the tour guide. Much to my chagrin, I didn't remember
her name. Despite having been Facebook friends for a few months, and despite
having been embarrassed the last time I couldn't remember her name.

Whoops.

The tour guides (mine, and the one I was hoping to run into) invited me along to
a trip to Lithuania's lake-castle. I declined because I'm an idiot and in one
fell swoop, somehow managed to not to make a bunch of awesome friends right at
the get go. We all became awesome friends a few weeks later, but I'm still a
little salty that we didn't get started sooner.

Living in a hostel for three weeks was pretty wild. I went on a lot of pub
crawls. I tried to melt cheese on top of hot chocolate. It didn't work out, as
you might have expected.

Some guys and I accidentally broke into a planetarium, and had to charm our ways
out of being arrested with the surly security guard who didn't speak even a bit
of English. A girl and I talked our way past the security guard at the
university's library, again, somehow without any Lithuanian.

A couple of kiwis and I somehow stumbled our way into a fantastic friendship
which culminated in eating ice cream and trying to take photos of ourselves
jumping nonstop for a solid hour.

The tourism girls invited me out for Lithuania's midsummer's festival, where two
couples, a very pretty girl and I journeyed together into the forest on the
rainiest day of the year. The couples paired off, so I was left to learn
traditional Lithuanian folk dances with a partner I was quite keen with whom to
learn some traditional Lithuanian folk dances. We jumped over a bonfire, and lit
tiki torches, and all wandered down a million steps to the river. At the river,
I watched with a tiny pang of jealousy as my dancing partner sent a flaming
wreath down the river in some sort of pagan ritual to find her husband. None of
us found any blooming ferns, unfortunately.

Midsummer's festival is sort of like New Years Eve in North America. Everyone
was there, and getting home was really hard. After trying to get a taxi for 30
minutes, we decided to walk the 15km home. After some much-needed Maccas, we
hiked up [Tauras hill][tauras] (and the [view][view]) and tried our best to
witness the sunrise through the unending rain and cloud cover. We were
unsuccessful, but found the kebab place, so it was all in all a pretty
successful night.

[tauras]: http://media-cdn.tripadvisor.com/media/photo-s/07/47/9b/f7/tauras-hill-the-former.jpg
[view]: https://drscdn.500px.org/photo/72065847/h%3D450/b861035ac50676d274a68120f1edc1c8

Living in a hostel was cool and all, but after a week I decided I couldn't do it
anymore. I started looking for a flat, and managed to find a potential roommate
-- an Argentinian man who had at least three differently named Facebook
profiles, each of whom had created some fake-looking "housing for students"
groups. It was a little sketchy, but he and his girlfriend seemed nice enough.
The three of us made arrangements to move in together; rent was cheap, and the
place was gorgeous. He wasn't going to be there on the move-in date, though.

I was convinced I was "moving in" with a con-man who would take my money and I'd
never hear from again. But I didn't really have a choice, and the money would be
going directly to the landlord. I couldn't actually figure out *how* it could be
a scam, so I went ahead with it.

It wasn't a scam! My roommates turned out to actually be super cool. They
weren't around for my first week of tenancy, however, so I had the place to
myself. At least, until a woman whom I had met in Cornwall inexplicably arrived
in town, intending to stay at my place. I'm not sure how she made it, but I'm
pretty sure I hadn't invited her. However, not wanting to be a bad host, I let
her stay over.

Things got fresh. Things got *weird*. She had decided she was going to stay for
ten days, but things didn't work out.

I kicked her out after four.

With my new place in gear, a solid group of friends nearby, and a memorized
route to the kebab place, things took a turn into the realm of being marvelous.
We hung out every day. We did a lot of drinking. I tried to learn how to
skateboard over the cobblestone streets of Vilnius. I learned enough Lithuanian
to be able to buy *kebabai*. One time we played twister.

After a week or two of *the moves* ambiguously connecting with my folk-dancing
partner, I decided to tell her that I liked her. It didn't go well. She was
gracious about it though, and after far too many drinks we ended up having snuck
into [Gediminas' tower][gediminas] where we looked out over the city and talked
about what we wanted out of life. Despite the rejection, it was one of my
favorite nights of the year.

One night during the Perseids, we took a detour on our hike up to the [Three
Crosses][crosses], where the girls tried to perform a ritualistic sacrifice on
me. They were unsuccessful, but only barely. We spent the night lying on our
backs, looking up at the cosmos, while the girls somehow managed to keep missing
the shooting stars.

My 25th birthday occurred while I was in Lithuania. In the style of my friend
[Malcolm][malcolm], instead of wishing me "happy birthday", I had told people to
share a fond memory they had had with me. My dutch friend and I drank beer by
the liters, and the girls got me a gigantic uncooked steak. We somehow ended up
at a Lithuanian pun (a boat turned into a bar, called *the Barža*), and I proved
once and for all that my 74 second peeing record wasn't phony. Everyone was very
impressed.

You should be too.

I've got a million other Lithuanian stories, but these are some of my favorites,
so I'll spare you the excruciating detail of the remainder of them.

I left Lithuania with a heavy heart, but feeling a little wide-eyed for Iceland,
where I was stopping over for the weekend on my journey home. Turns out Iceland
is shit. Don't go, unless you really like tourism and hamburgers.

[gediminas]: http://www.efoto.lt/files/images/7332/5112.jpg
[crosses]: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/87/Vilnius_Three_Crosses.jpg
[malcolm]: http://malcolmocean.com/



## Fall -- Reality

On my way to San Francisco, I headed via Waterloo -- my old digs. It's really
strange how the city I once loved could be so different now that everyone has
graduated and left; it seems like maybe it wasn't the city that I loved but the
people.

So Waterloo was relatively uneventful. I got into some trouble, ate some
poutine, had a long discussion about feminism in academia, about the Canadian
spirit, and about whether or not humanity would be worth saving from oblivion at
any cost (yes). I also ate some kebab, which is definitely up there in the
highlight reel.

And finally it happened. Four months after leaving Waterloo to go gallivanting
around Europe, I left more permanently to start my new life in San Francisco
with my shiny new adult job. I spent two weeks living in corporate housing in
Santa Clara, which is far too long to live in Santa Clara. Two weeks was enough
for the culture shock to kick in. I didn't expect there to be any: Minnesota
notwithstanding, apparently San Francisco is the Canada of the US.

My longest-running roommate and long-running friend decided we should continue
our tenacious tenancy tendencies, and we somehow managed to beat the San
Francisco housing market by locking in a two-bedroom, one-bathroom place without
a working oven that is only 41% of our impressive after-tax salaries. Score!
What a great city!

We've now been settled in one place for four months and twelve days. To date,
this is the longest I have spent in one location over the last five years. We
decided to buy furniture and decorate. It's almost surreal to have this much
stability in my life. Really all I need now is a girlfriend and a dog and one
and a half children and I'd be all the way to adulthood.

Let's hope that doesn't happen anytime soon.

Speaking of girlfriends, I found myself in Mexico for my cousin's wedding, where
I met a couple of fantastic women on a bus. One of them and I accidentally found
ourself in a pseudo-long-distance-relationship, and I ended up spending
Christmas with her. I really like her, but we decided living in different
countries with no intentions of moving to be a bit of a roadblock on the path
to true love and everlasting happiness.

And so it didn't work out.

A new city has been amenable to starting new hobbies. On the uncoordinated
advice both of my boss and good friend, I decided to pick up the guitar. I'm a
few months in and already so much better than I ever was at the banjo. It's kind
of like cheating at how easy it is. Not that I'm good, but I'm better than I
should be for the investment I've put into it.

Perhaps further outside of my usual realm of comfort is that I've taken up
painting, as instructed by [Bob Ross][bob]. My evenings are spent cursing,
yelling at Bob to slow down, and rewinding his youtube videos time and time
again, trying to shamelessly copy everything he does. It's strangely reminiscent
of learning how to program all those moons ago. What should be a relaxing,
zen-like evening is instead ultra stressful, but it results in paintings that
aren't half bad.

Ravenous fans of my blog will note that I participated in some sort of
bastardized [national novel writing month][nanowrimo] this year, where I gave it
my some in an attempt to publish 50,000 words of reasonably-interesting blog
posts. I only made it to 20,000 words or so before running out of things to say,
but I'm glad I did it because the response was overwhelmingly good. All of the
essays I thought were cheap throwaways turned out to be fan favorites.

From this I took away that I should just shovel out more essays even if I'm not
very happy with them, because I'm a bit shit at determining what will be
popular.  [Sebastian Marshall][marshall] has some really good advice along these
lines, but I can't seem to track it down right now.

And I guess that takes us to now, give or take a month. The year felt like it
went by far too quickly, but having just spent a few hours writing out thousands
of words about it, it seems much more substantial now. I'd been planning on
ending this essay with a [more][2013] [traditional][2014] year-in-review but
let's be honest with one another, we're both tired of this. Splitting it out
into another post might salvage some readers who are on the fence about how long
this essay is, and will artificially inflate my post count for the year.

Let's hope it works out for me.

[bob]: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCdXKzUSbFZyBFt1h2LjjvsQ
[nanowrimo]: http://nanowrimo.org
[marshall]: http://sebastianmarshall.com/
[2013]: http://sandymaguire.me/blog/2013-in-review
[2014]: http://sandymaguire.me/blog/2014-postmortem

