---
layout: post
title: 2015 Year End Report
date: 2015-12-29 15:03
comments: true
tags: foo, bar
---

Because I liked doing it so much last year, I thought it would be fun to collect
all sorts of new analytics from last year. Collecting all sorts of analytics was
the [stated goal][2014] of 2014, but it went poorly. My original attempts to
collect everything in one place failed pretty spectacularly, so the records I
have are what I could scrape together from various sources.

[2014]:

# activity
2,252,325 steps according to fitbit
1200 floors
1688.31km
826,936 calories burned

## School

- accio
- graduated
- wrote a compiler
- got a cool ring + ceremony


## Travel

Spent four months traveling.

- Total countries: 7+2
- New countries: 3+1
- Distance flown: 34,896km
- Flights: 15


## Money

Can't track, due to three banks over the course of the year. Unfortunate.


## Love

- Sex partners: 6
- People kissed: 9
- People gone on dates with: 7 (correlation with sex partners: 45%)
- Tinder dates: 3

Quit Tinder half way through the year. Switched to CMB for a few months, due to
having better luck. Quit it as well.


## Social

- Friends made: 143
- Friends removed: 167
- Net friends: -24 (negative two years in a row, despite a shit-ton of traveling!)

Don't have the bandwidth (or API keys) to compute messages sent this year.
Expected to be ~60% of last year.


## Youtube

Roughly split into six major categories of what takes up my online viewing
habits.

I stripped out music from this.

### Game Grumps

Videos watched: 1045 (avg: 2.86/day)
Total time spent: 245 hours, 6 minutes, 55 seconds (avg: 14.1min/video, 4.2% of
    waking life)
Best episodes:
- funny joke
- subway rant
- I think I'm going crazy

### Educational

Videos watched: 228 (avg: 0.623/day)
Total time spent: 107 hours, 23 seconds (avg: 28.2min/video, 1.8% of waking life)
Best video:
- propositions as types https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IOiZatlZtGU

### Minecraft

Videos watched: 160 (avg: 0.438/day)
Total time spent: 74 hours, 6 minutes, 16 seconds (avg: 27.8min/video, 1.2% of waking life)

### Red Letter Media

Film reviews. Much faster than actually watching them =)

Videos watched: 71
Total time spent: 32 hours, 36 minutes, 46 seconds (avg: 27.6min/video, 0.55% of waking
    life)
Best:
- fuck you, it's january

### Vinesauce

Videos watched: 189 (avg: 0.52/day)
Total time spent: 210 hours, 53 minutes, 45 seconds (avg: 67.0min/video, 3.6% of
    waking life)
Best:
- joel rct

### Other

Videos watched: 1472 (avg: 4.0/day)
Total time spent: 316 hours, 44 minutes, 39 seconds (avg: 12.9min/video, 5.4% of
    waking life)

### Totals

Videos watched: 3165 (avg: 8.7/day)
Total time spent: 986 hours, 28 minutes, 45 seconds (avg: 18.7min/video, 16.9%
    of waking life)

Caveat: I watched most of vinesauce and education at >=1.5x. I didn't watch most
of vinesauce.


## Productivity

Blog posts published: 19
Words published: 38,001 (avg: 2000/post, 104/day)
Best received: http://sandymaguire.me/blog/why-i-quit
My favorite: http://sandymaguire.me/blog/programming

Source commits: 828
Best project: take2
Best commit: again monad



## Music

hello michelle type
